Water reserves

Panorama of the reservoir
The seven major perennial rivers of the Gir region are Hiran, Shetrunji, Dhatarvadi, Shingoda, Machhundri, Ambajal and Raval. The four reservoirs of the area are at four dams, one each on Hiran, Machhundri, Raval and Shingoda rivers, including the biggest reservoir in the area, the Kamleshwar Dam, dubbed 'the lifeline of Gir'. It is located at 21°08′08″N to 70°47′48″E.

During peak summer, surface water for wild animals is available at about 300 water points. When drought hits the area following poor rainfall, surface water is not available at a majority of these points, and water scarcity becomes a serious problem (mainly in the eastern part of the sanctuary). Ensuring the availability of water during peak summer is one of the major tasks of the Forest Department staff.[citation needed]

Flora

Panorama of Jungle

Teak trees
More than 400 plant species were recorded in the survey of Gir forest by Samtapau & Raizada in 1955. The botany department of M.S. University of Baroda has revised the count to 507 during their survey. According to the 1964 forest type classification by Champion & Sheth, the Gir forest falls under "5A/C-1a—very dry teak forest" classification. Teak occurs mixed with dry deciduous species. The degradation stages (DS) sub-types are thus derived as:

5/DS1-Dry deciduous scrub forest and
5/DS1-Dry savannah forests (Locally known as "vidis"). It is the largest dry deciduous forest in western India.[1]
Teak bearing areas are mainly in the eastern portion of the forest, which constitutes nearly half of the total area. Several species of acacia are found. Also found here are ber, jamun (Syzygium cumini), babul (acacia), flame of the forest, zizyphus, tendu and dhak. Also plants like karanj, umlo, amli, sirus, kalam, charal and an occasional vad or banyan tree are found. These broadleaf trees provide a cool shade and moisture content to the region. As part of the afforestation programme casuarina and prosopis have been planted along the coast borders of gir.

The forest is an important biological research area with considerable scientific, educational, aesthetic and recreational values. It provides nearly 5 million kilograms of green grass by annual harvesting, which is valued approximately at ₹ 500 million (US$7.12 million). The forest provides nearly 123,000 metric tons worth of fuel wood annually.